.TH PSGPLAY 1 2020-05-30 "PSG play manual"

.SH NAME
psgplay \- music player for Atari ST YM2149 SNDH files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B psgplay [\fIOPTIONS\fR]... [\fIsndh-file\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIPSG play\fR is a music player and emulator for the Atari ST
Programmable Sound Generator (PSG) YM2149 and the SNDH file format.

.SH OPTIONS
\fIPSG play\fR accepts the following options.

General options:

.RS

.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print the synopsis and exit.

.TP
.BR \-\-version
Print \fIPSG play\fR version and exit.

.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Increase verbosity. May be repeated.

.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-info
Print SNDH file information and exit.

.RE

Play options:

.RS

.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output "=<" \fIfile\fR ">"
Write audio output to the given file in WAVE format,
or, if ALSA is available, to an ALSA handle if prefixed with "alsa:"
(default is "alsa:default").

.TP
.BR \-\-start "=<[" \fImm:\fR "]" \fIss\fR "[" \fI.ss\fR "]>"
Start playing at the given time, given in seconds, or minutes and seconds
separated with a colon, and optionally subseconds.

.TP
.BR \-\-stop "=<[" \fImm:\fR "]" \fIss\fR "[" \fI.ss\fR "]|" \fIauto\fR "|" \fInever\fR ">"
Stop playing at the given time, given in seconds, or minutes and seconds
separated with a colon, and optionally subseconds, or automatically
if the track has a known duration, or never.

.TP
.BR \-\-length "=<[" \fImm:\fR "]" \fIss\fR "[" \fI.ss\fR "]>"
Play for the given duration, given in seconds, or minutes and seconds
separated with a colon, and optionally subseconds.

.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mode "=<" \fIcommand\fR "|" \fItext\fR ">"
\fIPSG play\fR defaults to \fIinteractive text mode\fR if it is compiled
with ALSA for Linux or PortAudio for Linux or Mac OS.

.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-track "=<" \fInumber\fR ">"
Set track number.

.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-frequency "=<" \fIfrequency\fR ">"
Set audio frequency in Hz (default 44100).

.TP
.BR \-\-psg-mix "=<" \fIempiric\fR "|" \fIlinear\fR ">"
Empiric (default) mixes the three PSG channels as measured on Atari ST hardware;
linear sums the channels to produce a cleaner sound.

.TP
.BR \-\-psg-balance "=<" \fIA\fR ":" \fIB\fR ":" \fIC\fR ">"
Set balance between -1 (left) and +1 (right) for PSG channels A, B and C.
For example -0.4:0:+0.4 for stereo effect. Default is 0:0:0 for mono.

.TP
.BR \-\-psg-volume "=<" \fIA\fR ":" \fIB\fR ":" \fIC\fR ">"
Set volume between 0 (off) and +1 (max) for PSG channels A, B and C.
For example 0:0:1 to play channel C only. Default is 1:1:1.

.RE

Disassembly options:

.RS

.TP
.BR \-\-disassemble
Disassemble SNDH file and exit. The disassembly is guided by instruction
reachability from the \fIinit\fR, \fIplay\fR, and \fIexit\fR entry points,
to separate executable instructions from data.

To deal with interrupt code and self-modifying code, use both the
\fB--disassemble\fR and the \fB--trace=cpu\fR options. The disassembly will
then print what the processor actually executed in memory, which may have
been modified by the program itself, rather than the contents of the SNDH
file. The tracing execution length can be set with the \fB--length\fR option.

.TP
.BR \-\-disassemble-header
Disassemble SNDH file header and exit. This option is the safest choice
when updating SNDH metadata, because most of the code is retained with
\fIdc.b\fR data bytes for exact reassembly.

.TP
.BR \-\-disassemble-address
Display address column in disassembly.

.TP
.BR \-\-remake-header
Remake SNDH file header in disassembly. The can be used to repair broken
SNDH metadata such as missing tags, excessive whitespace, etc. It can also
be used to update or add new metadata, by editing the produced assembly
source code in an editor.

.RE

Trace options:

.RS

.TP
.BR \-\-trace "=<" \fIdevice\fR ">,..."
Trace device operations of SNDH file and exit. The trace execution length
can be set with the \fB--length\fR option. Default is 60 seconds. Devices:
\fIall\fR,
\fIcpu\fR,
\fIreg\fR.

The \fB--trace\fR option can be combined with the \fB--disassemble\fR
option. Review the \fB--disassemble\fR option manual section for details.

The SNDH file is loaded in memory at address 4000 (in hexadecimal).

.RE

.SH COMMAND MODE
\fIPSG play\fR runs in command mode if it is not compiled with ALSA for Linux,
or PortAudio for Linux or Mac OS, or the options \fB-o\fR, \fB--output\fR,
\fB--start\fR, \fB--stop\fR, \fB--length\fR, \fB--disassemble\fR or
\fB--trace\fR are given. Atari ST does not support command mode.

.SH INTERACTIVE TEXT MODE
For Linux and Mac OS, terminal mode and ECMA-48 are used, including support
for job control such as process suspension.

The currently playing tune is indicated in reverse video. A cursor is
shown with \fI>\fR. Keyboard controls:

    \fIescape\fR or \fIq\fR to quit;
    \fIs\fR to stop;
    \fIp\fR or \fIspacebar\fR to pause;
    \fI-\fR to decrease volume;
    \fI+\fR to increase volume;
    \fI1\fR, \fI2\fR, ..., \fI9\fR to play tunes 1, 2, ..., 9;
    \fI<\fR to play the previous tune;
    \fI>\fR to play the next tune;
    \fIk\fR or \fIup arrow\fR to move the cursor up;
    \fIj\fR or \fIdown arrow\fR to move the cursor down;
    \fIreturn\fR to play the tune at the cursor.

.SH RESOURCES
https://github.com/frno7/psgplay

.SH NOTES
\fIPSG play\fR does not yet emulate Atari STE DMA sound and LMC1992 tone
and volume hardware.
